# em-ledger Command Line Interface

## Keys

### Key Types

There are four types of key representations that are used:

- `emoney`
  - Derived from account keys generated by `emd keys add`.
  - Used to receive funds.
  - e.g. `emoney1a3s4dc3dnk5dqrnlk8ph4qw7q3fnqt2g66fu97`.

- `emoneypub`
  - Derived from account keys generated by `emd keys add`.
  - Can be used to construct multisig accounts.
  - e.g. `emoneypub1addwnpepqtgk3y6js7ag92czg4tdxuh4hj7krugqkmhadypesu7cyvdz48x5gghef8z`.

- `emoneyvaloper`
  - Used by validator operators for management purposes.
  - Derived from account keys generated by `emd keys add`.
  - e.g. `emoneyvaloper1a3s4dc3dnk5dqrnlk8ph4qw7q3fnqt2ga60gmn`.

- `emoneyvalconspub`
  - Used by the underlying consensus protocol ("Tendermint signing").
  - Generated when the node is created with `emd init`.
  - Get this value with `emd tendermint show-validator`.
  - e.g. `emoneyvalconspub1addwnpepqtgk3y6js7ag92czg4tdxuh4hj7krugqkmhadypesu7cyvdz48x5gu767wn`.

### Generate Keys

You'll need an account private and public key pair to be able to receive funds and sign/send transactions.

It is highly recommended to use a [Ledger Nano](https://www.ledger.com/) device to securely manage keys. See [this guide](ledger.md) for further information.

To generate a new _secp256k1_ key stored locally:

```bash
emd keys add <key_name>
```

Next, you will have to create a passphrase to protect the key on disk. The output of the above
command will contain a _seed phrase_. It is recommended to save the _seed phrase_ in a safe
place so that in case you forget the password, you could eventually regenerate the key from
the seed phrase with the following command:

```bash
emd keys add --recover
```

If you check your private keys, you'll now see `<key_name>`:

```bash
emd keys show <key_name>
```

View the validator operator's address via:

```shell
emd keys show <key_name> --bech=val
```

You can see all your available keys by typing:

```bash
emd keys list
```

View the validator pubkey for your node by typing:

```bash
emd tendermint show-validator
```

Note that this is the Tendermint signing key, _not_ the operator key you will use in delegation transactions.

### Generate Multisig Public Keys

You can generate and print a multisig public key by typing:

```bash
emd keys add --multisig=key_name_1,key_name_2,key_name_3[...] --multisig-threshold=K multisig_key_name
```

`K` is the minimum number of private keys that must have signed the
transactions that carry the public key's address as signer.

The `--multisig` flag must contain the name of public keys that will be combined into a
public key that will be generated and stored as `new_key_name` in the local database.
All names supplied through `--multisig` must already exist in the local database. Unless
the flag `--nosort` is set, the order in which the keys are supplied on the command line
does not matter, i.e. the following commands generate two identical keys:

```bash
emd keys add --multisig=foo,bar,baz --multisig-threshold=2 multisig_key_name
emd keys add --multisig=baz,foo,bar --multisig-threshold=2 multisig_key_name
```

Multisig addresses can also be generated on-the-fly and printed using this command:

```bash
emd keys show --multisig-threshold K name1 name2 name3 [...]
```

For more information regarding how to generate, sign and broadcast transactions with a
multi signature account see [Multisig Transactions](#multisig-transactions).

## Transaction Broadcasting

When broadcasting transactions, `emd` accepts a `--broadcast-mode` flag. This
flag can have a value of `sync`, `async`, or `block` (default), where `sync` makes
the client return a CheckTx response, `async` makes the client return immediately,
and `block` makes the client wait for the tx to be committed (or timing out).

As the e-Money network features on-demand block generation (it creates a new block as soon as a transaction is pending)
it is recommended to use the default setting (`block`) to know the outcome of the transaction immediately.

## Fees & Gas

Each transaction may either supply fees or gas prices, but not both.

e-Money uses network-wide minimum gas prices that validators use when determining if they should include the transaction in a block during `CheckTx`, where `gasPrices >= minGasPrices`.

The prevailing minimum gas prices, including accepted token denominations, can be queried using this command:

```bash
emd query authority gas-prices

min_gas_prices:
- denom: echf
  amount: "0.530000000000000000"
- denom: eeur
  amount: "0.500000000000000000"
- denom: ungm
  amount: "1.000000000000000000"
...
```

Your transaction must supply fees that are greater than or equal to __any__ of the denominations the validator requires, e.g. 

```bash
emd tx send ... --fees="50000ungm"
```

or

```bash
emd tx send ... --gas-prices="1.0ungm"
```

## Account

### Query Account Balance

After receiving tokens to your account, you can query your balance using this command:

```bash
emd query account <key_name>
```

For vesting accounts, the currently spendable amount can be queried using this command:

```bash
emd query spendable <key_name>
```

When you query an account with zero balance, you will get this error: `No account with address <address> was found in the state.`.

### Sending Tokens

The following command could be used to send coins from one account to another:

```bash
emd tx send <sender_key_name_or_address> <recipient_address> 1000000eeur --gas-prices="0.5eeur"
```

You may want to cap the maximum gas that can be consumed by the transaction via the `--gas` flag.
If you pass `--gas=auto`, the gas supply will be automatically estimated before executing the transaction.
Gas estimate might be inaccurate as state changes could occur in between the end of the simulation and the actual execution of a transaction, thus an adjustment is applied on top of the original estimate in order to ensure the transaction is broadcasted successfully. The adjustment can be controlled via the `--gas-adjustment` flag, whose default value is 1.0.

Now, view the updated balances of the origin and destination accounts:

```bash
emd query account <sender_key_name_or_address>
emd query account <recipient_address>
```

You can build a transaction and print its JSON format to STDOUT by appending `--generate-only` to the list of the command line arguments:

```bash
emd tx send <sender_key_name_or_address> <recipient_address> 1000000eeur --generate-only > unsigned_tx.json
```

_The `--generate-only` flag prevents `emd` from accessing the local keychain. 
Thus when this flag is supplied `<sender_key_name_or_address>` must be an address._

The transaction can now be signed:

```bash
emd tx sign --from=<key_name> unsigned_tx.json > signed_tx.json
```

You can validate the transaction's signatures by typing the following:

```bash
emd tx sign --validate-signatures signed_tx.json
```

You can broadcast the signed transaction to a node by providing the JSON file to the following command:

```bash
emd tx broadcast signed_tx.json
```

## Slashing

### Unjailing

To unjail your jailed validator

```bash
emd tx slashing unjail --from <validator_operator_key_name>
```

### Signing Info

To retrieve a validator's signing info:

```bash
emd query slashing signing-info <validator_pubkey>
```

### Query Parameters

You can get the current slashing parameters via:

```bash
emd query slashing params
```

## Staking

### Query Validators

You can query the list of all validators:

```bash
emd query staking validators
```

If you want to get the information of a single validator you can check it with:

```bash
emd query staking validator <operator_address>
```

### Bond Tokens

On the e-Money mainnet, we delegate `ungm`, where `1 NGM = 1000000ungm`. Here's how you can bond tokens to a testnet validator (_i.e._ delegate):

```bash
emd tx staking delegate --amount=10000000ungm --validator=<validator_operator_address> --from=<key_name>
```

While tokens are bonded, they are pooled with all the other bonded tokens in the network. Validators and delegators obtain a percentage of shares that equal their stake in this pool.

### Query Delegations

Once submitted a delegation to a validator, you can see it's information by using the following command:

```bash
emd query staking delegation <delegator_address> <validator_operator_address>
```

Or if you want to check all your current delegations with disctinct validators:

```bash
emd query staking delegations <delegator_address>
```

### Unbond Tokens

If for any reason the validator misbehaves, or you just want to unbond a certain amount of tokens, use this following command.

```bash
emd tx staking unbond <validator_addr> 1000000ungm --from=<key_name>
```

The unbonding will be automatically completed when the unbonding period (21 days) has passed.

### Query Unbonding-Delegations

Once you begin an unbonding-delegation, you can see it's information by using the following command:

```bash
emd query staking unbonding-delegation <delegator_address> <validator_operator_address>
```

Or if you want to check all your current unbonding-delegations with disctinct validators:

```bash
emd query staking unbonding-delegations <delegator_address>
```

Additionally, as you can get all the unbonding-delegations from a particular validator:

```bash
emd query staking unbonding-delegations-from <validator_operator_address>
```

### Redelegate Tokens

A redelegation is a type delegation that allows you to bond illiquid tokens from one validator to another:

```bash
emd tx staking redelegate \
  <source_validator_operator_address> \
  <destination_validator_operator_address> \
  1000000ungm --from=<key_name>
```

The redelegation will be automatically completed when the unbonding period has passed.

### Query Redelegations

Once you begin an redelegation, you can see it's information by using the following command:

```bash
emd query staking redelegation \
  <delegator_address> \
  <source_validator_operator_address> \
  <destination_validator_operator_address>
```

Or if you want to check all your current unbonding-delegations with distinct validators:

```bash
emd query staking redelegations <delegator_address>
```

Additionally, as you can get all the outgoing redelegations from a particular validator:

```bash
  emd query staking redelegations-from <validator_operator_address>
```

### Query Parameters

Parameters define high level settings for staking. You can get the current values by using:

```bash
emd query staking params
```

With the above command you will get the values for:

- Unbonding time
- Maximum numbers of validators
- Coin denomination for staking

### Query Pool

A staking pool defines the dynamic parameters of the current state. You can query them with the following command:

```bash
emd query staking pool
```

With the `pool` command you will get the values for not-bonded and bonded tokens.

### Query Delegations To Validator

You can also query all of the delegations to a particular validator:

```bash
  emd query delegations-to <validator_operator_address>
```

## Multisig Transactions

Multisig transactions require signatures of multiple private keys. Thus, generating and signing
a transaction from a multisig account involve cooperation among the parties involved. A multisig
transaction can be initiated by any of the key holders, and at least one of them would need to
import other parties' public keys into their keychain and generate a multisig public key
in order to finalize and broadcast the transaction.

For example, given a multisig key comprising the keys `key_name_1`, `key_name_2`, and `key_name_3`, each of which is held
by a distinct party, the user holding `key_name_1` would require to import the public keys of both `key_name_2` and `key_name_2` in order to
generate the multisig account public key:

```bash
emd keys add <key_name_2> --pubkey=emoneypub1...
emd keys add <key_name_3> --pubkey=emoneypub1...
emd keys add <multisig_key_name> --multisig-threshold=2 --multisig=<key_name_1>,<key_name_2>,<key_name_3>ß
```

A new multisig public key has been stored, and its address `multisig_address` can now be extracted:

```bash
emd keys show --address <multisig_key_name>
```

The `multisig_address` will be used as signer of multisig transactions explained below.

The first step to create a multisig transaction is to initiate it on behalf of the multisig address created above:

```bash
emd tx send <recipient_address> 1000000ungm --from=<multisig_address> --generate-only > unsigned_tx.json
```

The file `unsigned_tx.json` contains the unsigned transaction encoded in JSON.
`key_name_1` can now sign the transaction with its own private key:

```bash
emd tx sign unsigned_tx.json --multisig=<multisig_address> --from=<key_name_1> --output-document=signature_1.json
```

Once the signature is generated, `unsigned_tx.json` and `signature_1.json` to the either of the parties holding `key_name_2` or `key_name_3`.

They will in turn will generate their respective signature:

```bash
emd tx sign unsigned_tx.json --multisig=<multisig_address> --from=<key_name_2> --output-document=signature_1.json
```

`multisig_address` is a 2-of-3 multisig key, therefore one additional signature is sufficient. Any the key holders can
now generate the multisig transaction by combining the required signature files:

```bash
emd tx multisign unsigned_tx.json <multisig_address> signature_1.json signature_2.json > signed_tx.json
```

The transaction can now be sent to the node:

```bash
emd tx broadcast signed_tx.json
```

## Inflation

To query for the current inflation information:

```bash
emd query inflation
```

## Retrieving Historical Data

### Matching a Set of Events

You can use the transaction search command to query for transactions that match a
specific set of `events`, which are added on every transaction.

Each event is composed by a key-value pair in the form of `{eventType}.{eventAttribute}={value}`.
Events can also be combined to query for a more specific result using the `&` symbol.

You can query transactions by `events` as follows:

```bash
emd query txs --events='message.sender=emoney1...'
```

And for using multiple `events`:

```bash
emd query txs --events='message.sender=emoney1...&message.action=withdraw_delegator_reward'
```

The pagination is supported as well via `page` and `limit`:

```bash
emd query txs --events='message.sender=emoney1...' --page=1 --limit=20
```

The action tag always equals the message type returned by the `Type()` function of the relevant message.

You can find a list of available `events` on each of the SDK modules:

- [Market](/x/market/spec/03_events.md)
- [Staking](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/master/x/staking/spec/07_events.md)
- [Slashing](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/master/x/slashing/spec/06_events.md)
- [Distribution](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/master/x/distribution/spec/06_events.md)
- [Bank](https://github.com/cosmos/cosmos-sdk/blob/master/x/bank/spec/04_events.md)

### Matching a Transaction's Hash

You can also query a single transaction by its hash using the following command:

```bash
emd query tx <transaction_hash>
```
